RFC Editor proposed edits in AUTH48 (#248)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke: draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke.md

--- abstract

This document describes a scheme for hybrid public key encryption (HPKE).
This scheme provides a variant of public key encryption of arbitrary-sized
plaintexts for a recipient public key. It also includes three authenticated
variants, including one that authenticates possession of a pre-shared key
and two optional ones that authenticate possession of a key encapsulation
mechanism (KEM) private key. HPKE works for any combination of an asymmetric
KEM, key derivation function (KDF), and authenticated encryption with
additional data (AEAD) encryption function. Some authenticated variants may not
be supported by all KEMs. We provide instantiations of the scheme using widely
used and efficient primitives, such as Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) key

> agreement, HMAC-based key derivation function (HKDF), and SHA2.

Reviewer: I don't think so -- this reads fine without "the".

This document is a product of the Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG) in the IRTF.

--- middle

{::comment}
[rfced] Please insert any keywords (beyond those that appear in the
title) for use on https://www.rfc-editor.org/search.
{:/comment}

{::comment}
[rfced] Please ensure that the guidelines listed in Section 2.1 of
RFC 5743 (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5743#section-2.1) have
been adhered to in this document.
{:/comment}

{::comment}
[rfced] "public key" vs. "public-key"
in the attributive position (before a noun).
We see both forms are used in this document; do you have a preference?

For example, in the original:
  Hybrid Public Key Encryption (the title; no hyphen)
  and a couple instances of
  public key encryption / validation

vs. 10 instances in the document of
  public-key encryption / scheme / operations / validation

In general, we have received advice that it should not be
hyphenated in the attributive position, and it is listed here:
https://www.rfc-editor.org/materials/terms-online.txt

We note that the IANA registry does not contain the hyphen
(https://www.iana.org/assignments/hpke/), so depending on your

> decision here, there may be an update to its title.

Author: Personally, I generally prefer "public-key" in this position, but don't feel strongly.  And the terms document seems pretty clear.  So I have normalized on "public key" throughout.

HPKE variants rely on the following primitives:

> * A key encapsulation mechanism (KEM):

Reviewer 2: Looking at the [HTML](https://www.rfc-editor.org/authors/rfc9180.html) and the [PDF](https://www.rfc-editor.org/authors/rfc9180.pdf), the lists here got changed into definition lists. Semantically, that's probably what they should be. However, the rendering has no bullet points, which makes it kind of hard to read to me. Or maybe it is not the bullet points but the fact that `<code>` elements do _not_ have a slightly different color like in the rest of the document.

Author: I think the indentation is just due to things being at different levels.  In the main list, the first level is KEM/KDF/AEAD, and the functions are at the second level; the indentation is only at the second level.  The private key functions are at the first level, so they are not indented.

Nonetheless, I agree that this is more readable as a bulleted list.  Which is nice because I didn't reflect the definition list in this set of edits.  So I think we can leave this as it is, and negotiate with the RFC editor about reverting it to bullets.

The notation `pk(skX)`, depending on its use and the KEM and its
implementation, is either the
computation of the public key using the private key, or just syntax
expressing the retrieval of the public key, assuming it is stored along
with the private key object.

The following two functions are defined to facilitate domain separation of
KDF calls, as well as context binding:

{::comment}
[rfced] Please review the "type" attribute of each sourcecode element
in the XML file to ensure correctness. If the current list of preferred
values for "type" (https://www.rfc-editor.org/materials/sourcecode-types.txt)
does not contain an applicable type, then feel free to let us know.

In addition, review each artwork element. Specifically, should any artwork
element be tagged as sourcecode or another element?

Examples of usage of the artwork element from the documentation:
 diagrams ("line art") and protocol unit diagrams

> {:/comment}

Author: I don't think there's any artwork in this document.  For the most part, the `type` attribute should be `pseudocode`, except for the test vectors, which should be `test-vectors`.

entropy and SHOULD be of length `Nh` bytes or longer. Using a PSK longer than
32 bytes but shorter than `Nh` bytes is permitted.

HPKE is specified to use HKDF as its key derivation function. HKDF is not
designed to slow down dictionary attacks (see {{?RFC5869}}). Thus, HPKE's
PSK mechanism is not suitable for use with a low-entropy password as the
PSK: In scenarios in which the adversary knows the KEM shared secret

> `shared_secret` and has access to an oracle that distinguishes between

Reviewer 2: The oracle itself does not distinguish between good and wrong PSKs, it is the adversary that uses the oracle to do that.

Reviewer 2: Or:
```suggestion
`shared_secret` and has access to an oracle allowing to distinguish between
```

Reviewer 2: Coming back to it, I think the change done by the editors is good. Please excuse the noise.

in Sept. 2021 (xml2rfc release 3.10.0). <tt> no longer yields quotation
marks in the text rendering. In light of this, please review and let us
know if you want to make any changes (e.g., add quotation marks that
would be in all 3 output formats). For example:

Original:
       Each test vector lists the sequence number and
       corresponding nonce computed with "base_nonce", the plaintext
       message "pt", AAD "aad", and output ciphertext "ct".

Current text:
       Each test vector lists the sequence
       number and corresponding nonce computed with base_nonce, the
       plaintext message pt, AAD aad, and output ciphertext ct.

If you decide to add parentheses similar to usage in Section 9.9:
       Each test vector lists the sequence
       number and corresponding nonce computed with base_nonce, the
       plaintext message (pt), AAD (aad), and output ciphertext (ct).

Side note: <tt> yields fixed-width font in the HTML and PDF files.

This alternative diff file has been provided so that you can review
changes without the noise of the quotation marks being removed due
to this change to the rendering of <tt>:
https://www.rfc-editor.org/authors/rfc9180-alt-diff.html

> {:/comment}

Author: I'm OK with this rendering in the fixed-width version, as long as the HTML/PDF versions yield fixed-width.  @chris-wood @blipp ?

Reviewer: Yep, that works for me.

Reviewer 2: Works for me. Please see my related comment on the definition lists in “Cryptographic Dependencies”.

## DHKEM(X25519, HKDF-SHA256), HKDF-SHA256, AES-128-GCM

{::comment}
[rfced] In Appendix A, there are a number of lines that exceed the
69-character limit for a sourcecode element. Please review and let us
know how these lines can be modified.

Our understanding is that test vectors should be marked as <sourcecode>,
with or without the type set to “test-vectors”.  If you strongly prefer

> <artwork>, please let us know.

Author: They exceed the 69-character limit because you modified them to do so!

I don't have an opinion on `<sourcecode>` vs. `artwork`; if you use the already-wrapped values provided, they should fit within the 69-character limit.

exported_value:
84f3466bd5a03bde6444324e63d7560e7ac790da4e5bbab01e7c4d575728c34a
~~~

> # Acknowledgements

Author: It is important that the Acknowledgements come before the test vectors.  They shouldn't be buried after dozens of pages of random-looking data!

The authors would like to thank
Joël Alwen,
Jean-Philippe Aumasson,
David Benjamin,
Benjamin Beurdouche,
Bruno Blanchet,
Frank Denis,
Stephen Farrell,
Scott Fluhrer,
Eduard Hauck,
Scott Hollenbeck,
Kevin Jacobs,
Burt Kaliski,
Eike Kiltz,
Julia Len,
John Mattsson,
Christopher Patton,
Doreen Riepel,
Raphael Robert,
Michael Rosenberg,
Michael Scott,
Martin Thomson,
Steven Valdez,
Riad Wahby,
and other contributors in the CFRG for helpful feedback that greatly improved this document.

{::comment}
[rfced] Throughout the text, the following terminology appears to
be used inconsistently. Please review the usage and let us know if/how
they may be made consistent.

secret export vs. Secret Export

>   (e.g., secret export interface vs. Secret Export interface)

Author: I have changed all of these to lower case.

context vs. Context

>   (e.g., Context structure vs. context string)

Author: I have reviewed the various uses and think they're correct as-is.

{:/comment}

{::comment}
[rfced] Please review the "Inclusive Language" portion of the online
Style Guide <https://www.rfc-editor.org/styleguide/part2/#inclusive_language>
and let us know if any changes are needed.

In addition, please consider whether "traditional" should be updated for clarity.
While the NIST website
<https://www.nist.gov/nist-research-library/nist-technical-series-publications-author-instructions#table1>
indicates that this term is potentially biased, it is also ambiguous.

> "Tradition" is a subjective term, as it is not the same for everyone.

Author: "Traditional" here is not in terms of a human tradition (say, Thanksgiving).  Rather, it describes what is in the literature.
